Lab Assignment 5 Methods
Jordan Manchego
PLB 812 F22

1. I started by updating my R and Rstudio, then I installed DESeq2 and tximport using
	the R package manager BiocManager.
	
	
2. I then created two tables: one for my gene count data and another for my metadata. 
	
	My gene count table contained the information output by htseq in lab assignment 4,
	formatted with the gene_id in column one and the genotype's gene counts in columns
	two through fourteen. The genotype name served as column headers (except for col one).
	
	In my metadata table, the first column housed the name of each genotype while the
	control/drought condition and day_of_drought (0, 6, or 10) were housed in two additi-
	onal columns. I factored the genotype, day_of_drought, and condition into my
	metadata dataframe.
	
	Essentially, I used DESeq2's protocol for inputting matrix count data instead of
	their protocol for htseq_count data. This meant I had to create the metadata table
	myself, but it only took a few minutes. 
	
	
3. Next, I created the DESeq2 object 'dds' using the ~ condition design to compare
	differentially expressed genes between control and drought plants. I used my metadata
	table as my colData.
	

4. I prefiltered my data to discard all gene counts equal to or lower than 10. Before, I
	had 19982 rows in my DESeq2 dataframe. After, I had 18048. Next, I looked at the
	library size adjustment using estimateSizeFactors(dds).
	
	
5. From here, I moved on to quality control. 
	
	I plotted my estimate dispersions and they looked similar to the figure I saw in the 
	slides. I also compared this plot before and after prefiltering and I saw a pretty big
	difference in the point distribution.
	
	I then performed a variance stabilizing transformation and a regularized logarithm
	before calculating the distance between each sample. All 3 values were used as inputs
	to create a heatmap. My variance stabilizing transformation result was used to perform
	PCA and I was able to see three distinct clusters of differential expression across
	the genotypes.
	
	
6. From here I called the differential expression function of DESeq2 by starting with
	the Wald test to adjust significant p-values. I got a count of 4943 which seems high,
	and my MA plot didn't look as narrow as the one shown on the slides. However, this
	might be explained by the genes being expressed less differentially than the data
	in the example plot. I saved my MA plot to my assignment5 folder.
